
747 
FXUS63 KIND 181239 AAA
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
839 AM EDT Sat May 18 2024

.KEY MESSAGES...

- Dense fog early this morning

- Isolated showers and storms this afternoon

- Unseasonably warm Sunday-Tuesday with highs in 80s...ahead 
of increasing strong t-storm threat late Tuesday and Wednesday

&&

.FORECAST UPDATE...
Issued at 839 AM EDT Sat May 18 2024

Optimal conditions for dense fog are present this morning across 
central Indiana. MSLP pattern supporting calm winds, good radiative 
conditions, and residual low level moisture that has not been 
displaced. As diabatic surface heating continues this morning, fog 
will diminish. Satellite/ob trends suggest western and northern 
portions of the fog layer are improving first, and by around 10:00am 
southeast portions of Central Indiana will see improving visibility.

&&

.SHORT TERM (Today and tonight)...
Issued at 259 AM EDT Sat May 18 2024

Early This Morning...

Mostly clear skies, light winds, and moist low level atmosphere and 
ground have lead to some fog formation, especially across the 
southern forecast area. Satellite and surface observations show that 
dense fog is not widespread, but larger areas of thicker fog are 
developing in the far south.

Based on the satellite trends, and little change in the lower 
atmosphere, have issued a Dense Fog Advisory for the far south and 
southeast portions of the area. Will issue a Special Weather 
Statement farther north and west and will watch trends for possible 
expansion of the Advisory.

Today...

Fog will mix out after sunrise, but stratus will take longer to do 
so in the southeast where thicker fog was. Cumulus will pop up 
during the later morning and afternoon, so partly cloudy looks good 
for overall sky cover today.

The area will remain in some broad upper troughing, but best forcing 
will be south of central Indiana, closer to an upper low in the 
Tennessee Valley. 

In addition, there may be some lingering old surface boundaries 
across the area, based on convection seen Friday night. 

Given these, and some weak instability this afternoon, will keep an 
isolated shower/thunderstorm mention across the southeast two-thirds 
of the area. Confidence is not high though given the weak forcing.

Temperatures will warm to around 80 degrees most areas.

Tonight...

What, if any, convection that develops this afternoon should be gone 
or below mentionable coverage by 00Z. Will continue with a dry 
forecast this evening.

Overnight, a front will approach the area from the northwest. 
However, an upper ridge will have moved in. The front would have 
limited moisture to work with anyway, and with the ridge aloft, feel 
that central Indiana will remain dry.

Wouldn't be surprised if some patchy fog returns in the south given 
the light winds and continued low level moisture.

Low temperatures will be around 60.

&&

.LONG TERM (Sunday through Friday)...
Issued at 259 AM EDT Sat May 18 2024

Sunday through Monday Night...

Unseasonable warmth and rather humid conditions will be the rule 
through early next week as heights build into Indiana from the 
Mexican Highlands ahead of a slowly-plunging trough over the western 
CONUS.  Broad yet very weak surface high pressure aligned from the 
Great lakes to the Mid-Atlantic will oversee light winds Sunday that 
should trend to light to moderate southerly breezes by late Monday. 
Can't rule out a stray shower, especially late Monday...yet 
confidence was too low to deviate from the Blend's 14/less POPs. 
Dewpoints in the 60-65F range will guide overnight minimums...while 
afternoon highs reach the mid to upper 80s both days courtesy of 
ample sunshine.

Tuesday through Friday...

Central Indiana's proximity in the very warm and unseasonably humid 
warm sector of a slowly-approaching cold front...for what should be 
at least 3 periods into Wednesday...will present favorable 
conditions for at least a couple rounds of strong to severe storms. 
Diurnally driven instability possibly exceeding 2000-3000 J/kg both 
Tuesday and Wednesday should combine with ample mid-level lapse 
rates and increasing wind shear.  Uncertainty lies in embedded short 
waves in the southwesterly flow from the central High Plains to 
Upper Midwest which will influence lift and placement/timing of 
forcing aloft.  Wednesday should present the greater threat of 
stronger storms as the front approaches/crosses the CWA...although 
any prior MCS around the Tuesday night timeframe (and subsequent 
cloudiness) could dampen Wednesday's potential.  This dynamic and 
variable set-up will be refined in further updates into early next 
week.

Behind the mid-week frontal passage...a few showers cannot be ruled 
out amid modest westerly flow.  The next weather system should track 
into the Upper Midwest as the workweek ends, with POPs increasing 
again as it's cold front approached around the end of the long term.
Both max and min temperatures will approach record levels into 
Tuesday...before several days of seasonable conditions follow.

&&

.AVIATION (12Z TAF Issuance)...
Issued at 642 AM EDT Sat May 18 2024

Impacts:

- IFR and worse conditions early in the period

Discussion: 

Fog and stratus will persist early in the period across all sites. 
There remains some uncertainty on how fast fog and then stratus will 
mix out, so timing in the TAFs only has low to medium confidence. 

Cumulus will then form later this morning and persist into the 
afternoon. An isolated shower or thunderstorm is possible this 
afternoon, but odds are much too low to include in the TAF.

Additional fog may form overnight tonight.


&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Dense Fog Advisory until 10 AM EDT this morning for INZ035>037-
039>042-044>049-051>057-060>065-068>072.

&&

$$

UPDATE...BRB
SHORT TERM...50
LONG TERM...AGM
AVIATION...50


